Let's first of all say to ourselves,
what is it that we really
want from our marketing?
What are we trying to actually achieve,
okay?
In an ideal world,
how would we use kind of our outreach to
the rest of the world to benefit
us in our business, right?
So I think there's basically
three things that an agency or
a freelancer wants depending on
where they are in their career.
Sometimes it's just,
I need more, [LAUGH] right?
Any kind of work would be good right now,
so I just need something.
I need to know that I'm gonna be
able to feed my kids next month.
It can get that bad sometimes,
and it's a tough situation.
Other times, we're in a bit more of a
comfortable state where we've got enough,
but what we're getting
isn't really very good.
It's not the kind of
work we wanna be doing.
So a big part of my job these
days is actually mentoring and
supporting agencies and freelancers.
And one of the things I often find is that
a lot of people are scrambling around at
the bottom of the market,
which is very, very price sensitive.
So they're working on tiny little
websites when they're massively
overqualified to do them.
And they could be charging a lot more
than they are, except the stuff that
comes through the door is very price
sensitive, so they need better clients.
But better clients isn't necessarily
just those that aren't so
price sensitive, better might be if I have
to design one more insurance website,
please, can I work on something
a little bit cooler than that.
I wanna work with record labels,
or whatever it is that you
happen to want to work with.
Or if you are a more worthy person than
maybe I am, perhaps you wanna work for
charities, or sustainable organizations,
or whatever it be.
So better is another one.
And then the final one is easier, right?
The vast amount of time and energy
that can go into winning work is huge,
right, especially if you get yourself
into the world of pitching, right?
Where you have to basically apply
to win the piece of work and
you produce these long proposals.
And if you're particularly a green and
all of this,
you might even get convinced you
have to do speculative design work.
And you really get kind of sucked into
doing an enormous amount of work and
then you don't win it.
And it's like, wow, that was hard work for
not very much in return.
And then, of course, the other thing
is even doing marketing stuff.
I'm sure you've seen online all
the things you're supposed to do.
You're supposed to be blogging, and you're
supposed to be doing social media updates,
and you're supposed to be doing this,
and that, and the other, and
all of these things take a lot of time.
And if you're a freelancer or a small
agency, you don't have that time, right?
Every minute that you're doing that
kind of stuff, you're not working on
chargeable work, which means that
you're not earning money, okay?
So we kind of gotta come up with
a way of minimizing the amount of
effort that goes into winning work,
from getting people's attention all
the way through to closing the deal.
So that's kind of our aims, right?
That's the utopia that we're aiming for.
And it isn't actually utopia,
all of those things that are achievable.
It takes time, but you can get there.
So let's look at some
of the common mistakes,
right, that I see freelancers and
agencies making, okay?
And because there are kind of four that
I keep coming across time and again.
The first is that people rely much too
heavily on word of mouth recommendation,
right?
We're gonna dive into these a little
bit more detail in a minute.
Secondly, we waste a lot of
money on advertising, right?
So freelancers might do things
like take pay per click ads, or
Facebook ads, or get convinced that
they should buy a newspaper ad,
or to take part in some conference,
or whatever.
There are all these people trying to
extract money from us in return for
supposedly leads and clients.
And then another common mistake is getting
work through online marketplaces, or
if you just go to, sign up to fiverr.com
or guru.com, you can win work there.
You can, but it's not the best work,
but we'll come on to that in a minute.
And then finally, is approaching content
marketing in entirely the wrong way right?
Content marketing is supposed to be
the answer to everything, right?
That's how you win work and
build your reputations.
And it's like yes and no,
it very much depends on how you use it.
So let's dive into those
a little bit more details so
you can kind of understand where
the problems come from, right?
Word of mouth recommendations,
this just drives me nuts, right?
Every now and again,
it often happens with well established
people that have been in the industry for
years.
They make comments on social media like,
yes,
we don't advertise or marketing,
our work speaks for ourselves.
And people come to us because
[SOUND] it's so kind of yeah.
Now, don't get me wrong, right?
Word of mouth for recommendation
is really, really important, okay?
A lot of my work comes
through word of mouth, okay?
And the longer you work,
the more clients you have,
the easier the work comes because you
get more word of mouth recommendation.
But there are some fundamental
problems with it and
I don't think we should be in
all good conscious encouraging
anybody to rely entirely on
word of mouth recommendation.
And in my opinion,
there's kinda three problems that
we've got with word of mouth.
Number one is that is passive, right?
So if the phone stops ringing,
right, if you have a month where
nothing comes through the door,
what you gonna do about it if you only
rely on word of mouth recommendation?
Are you're gonna nag your
clients to recommend you?
Yeah, that'll go down well.
You've got no action that you can take.
So in that sense,
it's really weak because you do,
every your company goes
through slow patches.
And you could put your feet up and
have a holiday, but
that's not always particularly sensible or
good.
Second is it's limiting.
The problem with word of mouth
recommendation is it typically happens
within a particular sector or amongst
companies of a certain size, right?
So somebody running the chip shop,
sorry that's a really
British choice of restaurant there,
the old chippy.
Yeah, the person that runs
the chippy on the corner doesn't
know the CEO of Coca-Cola,
that doesn't happen.
So what that means is that it's quite
limiting that you're not getting,
if you wanna work with a different
sector or you weren't wanna
work with bigger clients, then word
of mouth isn't gonna get you there.
And then the third
problem is pretty risky.
Word of mouth recommendation
can't work for you.
However, it has this
interesting effect and
it's something that I have
to deal with all the time.
Because I get a lot of word of mouth and
I'm actually in it right now as we speak.
So I won a piece of work
within an insurance company in
the UK called LV, right, and it was great.
And I had a really good project with them
and the guy that I worked with really
liked my work, and he recommended me to
their sister company which is Petplan.
And then I did a lot of work for
Petplan, this is going great.
And then for Petplan, I think somebody,
whether it was LV or Petplan recommended
me to another subsidiary of this parent
company, and now I'm doing work for them.
And then the parent company took interest
and now I'm doing work for them.
And before you know it,
a lot of my business is all
coming from this single client.
And then they turn around and say,
we've got new contracts we need you
to sign, that require you to have
certain liability insurance that is
way out of my ability to provide.
So all that work might go away overnight.
That's a dangerous position to
get into on a business, right?
So, word of mouth can be risky.
So yeah, what I guess I'm saying is
it's not the kind of answer that
everybody thinks it is, right?
Let's move on from that and
look at both really online ads and
the marketplaces because they
face similar problems, right?
Online ads and
marketplaces like Upwork, or Fiverr, or
whatever it is that you want to mention,
they're great, as far as they go.
And online ads fall into
this category as well, but
they they tend to attract smaller clients
that are primarily price orientated.
So if you think about it,
if you're, I don't know,
the marketing manager for Target, right,
you don't go on to fiverr.com
to find somebody to work with.
Equally, you don't just Google web
design agencies, or data scientists,
or whatever else, look down the ads and
go that one will do.
It doesn't happen like that, does it?
So what happens is it's, again,
you're a local chippy that uses
those kinds of places,
your local restaurants, etc.
And to be honest, even the kind of big,
the grown up version of that,
of Fiverr and things like that,
our procurement platforms where the larger
companies post their larger projects.
Even those actually are rarely
worth your time because there's
a naughty thing that happens, the dark
secret that nobody actually says out loud.
Which is that most of those jobs been
posted on these procurement platforms,
the company already has
the supplier they want, right, but
they're required by their procurement
department to get three tenders.
So you go through all of
this process of pitching for
this work only to discover you're not
the one they wanted anyway, right?
So it's a big roll of
the dice when you do that.
But with all of this, whether you're
talking about procurement platforms,
places like Upwork, or
online ads, basically,
what it boils down to is
there's no relationship, right?
You're just another supplier,
they haven't gone, I wanna work with you,
they've gone, I wanna work with a data
scientist, you'll do, [LAUGH] right?
That's a huge difference, you see.
So, we want clients that
approach us because we want
people that specifically
wanna work with us, right?
People that come to me wanna work with me,
to the point where I was talking
to somebody yesterday and
it's like I almost have
another problem now,
which is they get over enthusiastic
about working with you.
And they start making all these promises,
yeah, we'll definitely do this, and
we'll do that, and
whatever it takes, Paul.
And then they have to come back and go,
my manager says that we need
to talk about this properly.
[LAUGH] And that they got carried away,
but I'd prefer it that way round,
that's better problem.
So yeah, that's wasting money
on online ads and marketplaces.
Then there's content marketing.
Now content marketing can work.
And I wanna emphasize this because
my entire career has been built
on content marketing.
I was the first guy to ever
do a web design podcast,
there was no web design
podcasts before me.
I started blogging in 2005
before blogging was trendy,
before content marketing was the thing.
I was one of the first people in
the first 1,000 people on Twitter.
I've always done very
well out that cuts stuff,
more by luck than judgment,
I hasten to say.
But content marketing, although it's great
for establishing your credibility and
increasing your reach, it does come
with some significant challenges
that everybody kinda skirts over when
they talk about content marketing.
So, let's just be clear what they
are because that's gonna affect
what I recommend we do later.
So some of the biggest issues with content
marketing is too much noise now, right?
When I started my web design podcast,
I was getting half
a million people listening to every
episode, half a million, right?
Now, when I stopped podcasting,
it was down to a few thousand,
because when I started there was
no choice, I had a monopoly.
[LAUGH] These days there's so
many podcasts and so
many things asked after our attention
that it just you lost in the noise.
The other big problem is because of
that level of noise, you're gone and
then forgotten.
So what do I mean by that?
Let's say you wrote the best, or don't
worry, let's say you gave away something.
Let's say you gave away
an amazing piece of technology,
or advice, or an app,
or anything like that.
Maybe you go viral even,
that's the dream isn't it to go viral.
Everybody downloads your app or reads your
whatever, and then they look at it and
they go, yeah, that's great, when I need
to hire someone, I'm gonna go to you.
And then a week later,
they forgotten you, right?
They're on to the next new shiny thing.
So even if you succeed in content
marketing, you don't necessarily succeed.
It doesn't actually translate
into sales a lot of the time and
it's incredibly time consuming.
Yes, you have to put out multiple
social media updates every day.
You have to put a blog out once a week,
and don't forget to do your podcast,
and we've got time for all of that.